---
layout: default
title: About Everyday Rails
---

h2. Some background

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.

I've been using the Ruby on Rails web application framework since the relatively early days, after ten-plus years of doing web development the old-fashioned way with brittle, procedural spaghetti written mostly in Perl and PHP. Rails was my first framework, and I've never looked back. For the work I do it's been perfect, from the tool itself to the supporting cast of Rubyists and the expertise (and code) they share to get the most from the framework and the language.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.

h2. The plan

My goal is to share a couple of general, pragmatic tips each week to show how I use Rails (almost) every day to get stuff done on the job. I'll focus mostly on making things using Ruby on Rails, attempting to glean a better understanding of why the plugins, gems, and other Ruby parts do what they do to help me make as good an application as I can. If you learn something in the process, all the better. I doubt you'll get much out of _Everyday Rails_ if you're a seasoned Rails developer, but if you're, say, beginner-to-intermediate and are looking to cut to the chase and build some apps, I hope this will be of use to you.